# Introduction to Cloud Computing
## Overview of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is a business model or service that combines technology like virtualization with a few of the latest trends and if you require extra bandwidth, a cloud-based service can address that need promptly, rather than waiting for a complex and costly update to your IT infrastructure. Users can customize their applications using cloud services from anywhere if they have an Internet connection. In addition, cloud computing enables efficient marketing of applications regardless of maintenance and cost.

### History of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is an evolution of technology over time. The concept of cloud computing dates to the 1950s when large-scale mainframes with high-volume processing power became available. The practice of time sharing (or resource pooling) evolved to make efficient use of the computing power of mainframes. Using dumb terminals, whose sole purpose was facilitating access to the mainframes, multiple users could access the same data storage layer and CPU power from any terminal.

In the 1970s, with the release of an operating system called Virtual Machine (VM), it became possible for mainframes to have multiple virtual systems, or virtual machines, on a single physical node. The virtual machine operating system evolved from the 1950s application of shared access of a mainframe. By allowing multiple distinct computing environments to exist on the same physical hardware. Each virtual machine hosted guest operating systems that behaved like they had their own memory, CPU, and hard drives, even though these were shared resources. Virtualization thus became a technological driver and a massive catalyst for some of the most significant evolutions in communications and computing. Even 20 years ago, physical hardware was quite expensive.

With the internet becoming more accessible, and the need to make hardware costs more viable, servers were virtualized into shared hosting environments, virtual private servers, and virtual dedicated servers, using the same functionality the virtual machine operating system provided. So, for example, if a company needed an 'x' number of physical systems to run their applications, they could split one physical node into multiple virtual systems.

A hypervisor is a small software layer that enables multiple operating systems to run alongside each other, sharing the same physical computing resources. A hypervisor also separates the Virtual Machines logically, assigning each slice of the underlying computing power, memory, and storage, preventing the virtual machines from interfering with each other. So if, for example, one operating system suffers a crash or a security compromise, the others can keep working. As technologies and hypervisors improved and could share and deliver resources reliably, some companies decided to make the cloud's benefits accessible to users. These users did not have an abundance of physical servers to create their cloud computing infrastructure. Since the servers were already online, spinning up a new instance was instantaneous. Users could now order cloud resources from a larger pool of available resources and pay for them on a per-use basis, also known as pay-as-you-go or utility computing model. This model became one of the key drivers behind cloud computing's launching. The pay-per-use model allowed companies and even individual developers to pay for the computing resources as and when they used them, just like units of electricity. This allowed them to switch to a more cash-flow friendly OpEx model from a CapEx model. This model appealed to all sizes of companies, those who had little or no hardware, and even those that had lots of hardware, because now, instead of making substantial capital expenditures in hardware, they could pay for compute resources as and when needed. It also allowed them to scale their workloads during usage peaks, and scale down when usage subsided. And this gave rise to modern-day cloud computing.

### Definition of Cloud Computing
The US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defines cloud computing as a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction. Examples of computing resources include networks, servers, storage, applications, and services. This cloud model is composed of five essential characteristics, four deployment models and three service models.

### Five Essential Characteristics
The five essential characteristics of the cloud are on-demand self service, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service.

- **On-demand self-service** means you can access cloud resources whenever required. Services are always available on all days of the year. There are no exceptions other than when services are unable due to an outage or security breach.
- **Broad network access** means that cloud computing resources can be accessed through the network. Public cloud services could generally be accessible from anywhere and on any device with Internet connectivity and browser capabilities. Internet access is mandatory for accessing public cloud services.
- With **resource pooling**, consumers save on costs when using a shared model, which provides cloud providers economies of scale, making the cloud cost efficient. Computing resources are pulled to serve multiple consumers using a multi-tenant model, cloud resources are dynamically assigned and reassigned according to demand without customers needing to concern themselves with the physical location of these resources.
- **Rapid elasticity** implies that you can increase or decrease resources as per your demand. Because of the elastic property of the cloud, resources can be scaled up or down vertically scaling or scaled out as in horizontal scaling.
- **Measured service** means that you only pay for what you use or reserve as you go. Measured service is also termed as **a utility model of billing**, where you are charged after the usage and at the end of the predefined period, like monthly electric charges.

## Cloud Computing Service Models
### Overview
Three service models available on the cloud: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS).

IaaS is a set of compute networking and storage resources that have been virtualized by a vendor so that a user can access and configure them any way they want. The user of IaaS is usually a system admin or an IT admin.

Software as a Service is just software that you don't have to install on your machine and you don't have to manually update. So the user for Software as a Service could be anyone. It's usually charged on a subscription model, rather than a one-time license fee.

PaaS takes advantage of all the virtualized resources from Iaas and then just abstracts them away, so the user doesn't have to worry about managing any of those virtualized resources. The user for PaaS is usually a developer, not a system admin. As you move down the pyramid from SaaS to PaaS and then to IaaS, you're increasing complexity in terms of your knowledge and management of infrastructure resources, and as you move up, you're increasing the ease of use. 

Another metaphor is with a car. IaaS is like leasing a car. So if you've ever leased a car, you probably did a lot of research, and you care about the specs of the car and the performance. You care about the color of the car, what kind of car it is. You're the one driving and you're paying for it. You're also paying for the gas and any tolls or maintenance. PaaS is more like renting a car. So say you're on vacation and you just got off the airport and you're going to pick up your rental car. You don't really care what color it is. You don't really even care about the specs of it, but you're still driving and you're paying for the gas and any tolls you go through. SaaS is more like getting a taxi or an Uber. You don't care at all about what kind of car it is, what color it is and in fact, you're not even the one driving, or paying for gas, or any tolls because that's baked into the price.

In terms of cloud computing, with IaaS, the cloud provider manages the physical resources, data centers, cooling, power, network and security, as well as computing resources that include servers and storage. With PaaS, the provider, in addition to the computing resources, also manages the platform infrastructure which includes the operating systems, development tools, databases, and business analytics. With SaaS, in addition to the infrastructure and the platform resources, the provider also hosts and manages the applications and data.

### IaaS
Infrastructure-as-a-Service, commonly referred to as “IaaS,” is a form of cloud computing that delivers fundamental compute, network, and storage resources to consumers on-demand, over the internet, on a pay-as-you-go basis. The cloud provider hosts the infrastructure components traditionally present in an on-premises data center as well as the virtualization or hypervisor layer. In an IaaS cloud environment, customers can create or provision virtual machines (VMs) in their choice of Region and Zone available from the cloud Provider. These VMs typically come pre-installed the customer's choices of operating systems. The customers can then deploy middleware, install applications, and run workloads on these VMs. They can also and create storage for their workloads and backups. Cloud providers often provide customers the ability to track and monitor the performance and usage of their cloud services and manage disaster recovery.

Some key components of cloud infrastructure include:

- Physical data centers: IaaS providers manage large data centers that contain the physical machines required to power the various layers of abstraction on top of them. In most IaaS models, end users do not interact directly with the physical infrastructure but experience it as a service provided to them.
- Compute: IaaS providers manage the hypervisors and end-users programmatically provision virtual instances with desired amounts of compute, memory, and storage resources. Cloud compute typically comes with supporting services like auto scaling and load balancing that provide scalability and high performance.
- Network: Users get access to networking resources on the cloud through virtualization or programmatically, through APIs.
- Storage: There are three types of cloud data storage: object, file, and block storage. Object storage is the most common mode of storage in the cloud, given that it is highly distributed and resilient. IaaS supports a wide array of use cases.

Some typical use cases include

- **Test and development**: organizations today are using cloud infrastructure services to enable their teams to set up test and development environments faster, helping create new applications more quickly. By abstracting the low-level components, cloud infrastructure is helping developers focus more on business logic than infrastructure management.
- **Business continuity and disaster recovery** require a significant amount of technology and staff investments. IaaS is helping organizations reduce this cost and make applications and data accessible as usual during a disaster or outage.
- **Faster deployment and scaling**: Organizations are using cloud infrastructure to deploy their web applications faster and also scale infrastructure up and down as demand fluctuates.
- **High performance computing**: organizations are leveraging the high-performance computing capabilities of cloud infrastructure to solve complex problems involving millions of variables and calculations such as climate and weather predictions and financial modeling.
- **Big data analysis**: Mining massive data sets to locate valuable patterns, trends, and associations requires a huge amount of processing power. Cloud infrastructure not only provides the required high-performance computing but also makes it economically viable.

While there are some concerns regarding the lack of transparency in the cloud infrastructure's configuration and management, and dependency on a third-party for workload availability and performance, Infrastructure-as-a-Service is the fastest growing cloud model today.

### PaaS
Platform as a Service, commonly referred to as PaaS, is a cloud computing model that provides customers a complete platform to develop, deploy, manage and run applications created by them or acquired from a third party. The PaaS provider hosts everything: servers, networks, storage, operating system, application runtimes, APIs, middleware, databases and other tools at their data center. The provider also takes responsibility for the installation, configuration, and operation of the application infrastructure, leaving the user responsible for only the application code and its maintenance. Customers pay for this service on a usage basis and purchase resources on demand. With IaaS, the cloud provider offers access to raw computing resources such as servers, storage, and networking, while the user is responsible for the platform and application software. With PaaS, the cloud service provider delivers and manages the entire platform infrastructure, abstracting users from the lower level details of the environment.

Some essential characteristics of PaaS include:

- PaaS clouds are distinguished by the **high level of abstraction** they provide to the users, eliminating the complexity of deploying applications, configuring infrastructure, and provisioning and configuring supporting technologies like load balancers and databases.
- PaaS clouds provide **services and APIs** that help simplify the job of developers in delivering elastically scalable and highly available cloud applications. These services typically include a variety of capabilities such as APIs for distributing, caching, queuing and messaging, file and data storage, workload management, user identity, and analytics, thus eliminating the need to integrate disparate components.
- The PaaS **runtime environment** executes end user code according to policies set by the application owner and cloud provider.
- Many of the PaaS offerings provide developers with **rapid deployment mechanisms** or push and run mechanism for deploying and running applications.
- PaaS offerings support a range of **application infrastructure and middleware capabilities** such as application servers, database management systems, business analytics servers, mobile backend services, integration services, business process management systems, rules engines, and complex event processing systems. Such an application infrastructure assists developers by reducing the amount of code that must be written while expanding the application's functional capabilities.

The most important use case for PaaS is strategic, build, test, deploy, enhance and scale applications rapidly and cost effectively.

- **API development and management.** Organizations are using PaaS to develop, run, manage and secure APIs and microservices, which are loosely coupled, independently deployable components and services.
- **Internet of Things (IoT).** PaaS clouds support a broad range of application environments, programming languages, and tools used for IoT deployments.
- **Business analytics and business intelligence.** PaaS tools allow organizations to analyze their data to find business insights that enable more informed business decisions and predictions.
- **Business Process management (BPM).** Organizations are using the PaaS cloud to access BPM platform delivered as a service.
- **Master data management (MDM).** Organizations are leveraging the PaaS cloud to provide a single point of reference for critical business data, such as information about customer transactions and analytical data to support decision-making.

Some advantages of using PaaS include:

- **Scalability**, made possible because of the rapid allocation and deallocation of resources with a pay-as-you-use model offered by PaaS.
- The APIs support services and middleware capabilities that PaaS clouds provide assist developers in focusing their efforts on application development and testing, resulting in **faster time-to-market** for their products and services. Middleware capabilities also reduce the amount of code that need to be written while expanding the application's functional capabilities.
- **Greater agility and innovation**, because using PaaS platforms means that you can experiment with multiple operating systems, languages and tools without having to invest in these resources. You can evaluate and prototype ideas with very low risk exposure, resulting in faster, easier, less risky adoption of a wider range of resources.

Some of the key PaaS offerings available in the market today include AWS Elastic Beanstalk, cloud Foundry, IBM cloud Paks, Windows Azure, Red Hat OpenShift, Magento Commerce cloud, force.com, and Apache Stratos.

PaaS clouds do come with some risks, risks that all cloud offerings have in general, such as information security threats and dependency on the service provider's infrastructure. Services can get impacted when a service provider's infrastructure experiences downtime. Customers also don't have any direct control over the changes that may take place when a provider makes changes in its strategy, service offerings or tools. But the benefits can far outweigh these risks. PaaS continues to experience strong growth and is predicted to become the prevailing platform delivery model moving forward.

### SaaS
Software-as-a-Service, or “SaaS,” is a cloud offering that provides users with access to a service provider's cloud-based software. SaaS providers maintain the servers, databases, and code that constitute an application. They also manage access to the application, including security, availability, and performance. Applications reside on a remote cloud network, and users use these applications without having to maintain and update the infrastructure.

Core business processes supported by SaaS today include email and collaboration via offerings such as Microsoft's Office 365 and Google's Gmail, Customer Relationship Management via services such as NetSuite CRM and Salesforce, Human Resource Management via services from Workday and SAP SuccessFactors, financial management, billing and collaboration, and many more. According to Forrester Research, SaaS has overtaken on-premises solutions in categories such as human capital management (HCM), customer relationship management (CRM), and collaboration. Solutions once available with several different deployment options are now SaaS-only.

Let's look at key characteristics of Software-as-a-Service: SaaS clouds have a multitenant architecture. Infrastructure and code are maintained centrally and accessed by all users. SaaS makes it easy for users to manage privileges, monitor data use, and ensure everyone sees the same information at the same time. Security, compliance, and maintenance are all part of the offering. In SaaS, customizations are often limited, however some SaaS applications may allow certain types of customizations like branding; they can modify data fields and enable or disable features within the business process. These customizations are preserved through upgrades. Users pay for the use of the services via a subscription model. The use of resources can be scaled easily, depending on service needs.

Key benefits of adopting SaaS: Businesses can directly procure solutions without upfront capital and assistance from IT, greatly reducing the time from decision to value from months to days. SaaS greatly increases workforce productivity and efficiency. Users can access core business apps from wherever; they can also buy and deploy apps in minutes reducing the typical obstacles enterprises have to test the products they might use. Using SaaS applications, individuals and small enterprises can spread out their software costs over time.

Organizations are moving to SaaS for their core business needs as part of their strategic transformation to

- Reduce on-premises IT infrastructure and reduce capital expenditure
- Avoid the need for ongoing upgrades, maintenance, and patching, done traditionally by internal IT resources
- Run applications reliably with minimal input, for example, email servers and office collaboration and productivity tools
- Opt for SaaS eCommerce Platforms to manage their websites, marketing, sales, and operations
- Take advantage of the resilience and business continuity of the cloud provider

Enterprises are now developing SaaS integration platforms (or SIPs) for building additional SaaS applications, moving SaaS beyond standalone software functionality to a platform for mission-critical applications.

SaaS does evoke some concerns, as well. Primary among them being data ownership and data safety. Security is an important consideration when you're allowing a third-party to maintain business-critical data. And application access relies on a good network connection. But the benefits far outweigh the concerns, with SaaS making up the largest segment of the cloud market today.

## Cloud Computing Deployment Models
Deployment models indicate where the infrastructure resides, who owns and manages it, and how cloud resources and services are made available to users. The four cloud deployment models include—Public cloud, Private cloud, Community cloud and Hybrid cloud.

### Public Cloud
In a public cloud model, users get access to servers, storage, network, security, and applications as services delivered by cloud service providers over the internet. Using web consoles and APIs, users can provision the resources and services they need. The cloud provider owns, manages, provisions, and maintains the infrastructure, renting it out to customers either for a subscription charge or usage-based fee. Users don't own the servers their applications run on or storage their data consumes, or manage the operations of the servers, or even determine how the platforms are maintained. In very much the same way that we consume and pay for utilities such as water, electricity, or gas in our everyday lives, we don't own any of these cloud resources—we make an agreement with the service provider, use the resources, and pay for what we use within a certain period. Public clouds offer significant cost savings in terms of Total Cost for Ownership (TCO) as the provider bears all the capital, operational, and maintenance expenses for the infrastructure and the facilities they are hosted in. It makes scalability as easy as requesting more capacity. However, with a public cloud, the user does not have any control over the computing environment and is subject to the performance and security of the cloud provider's infrastructure.

There are several public cloud providers in the market today, such as Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, IBM cloud, Google cloud Platform, and Alibaba cloud. While all providers include a common set of core services, such as servers, storage, network, security, and databases, they also offer a wide spectrum of niche services with varied payment options. 

A public cloud is a virtualized multi-tenant architecture enabling tenants or users to share computing resources, residing outside their firewalls. The cloud provider's pool of resources, including infrastructure, platforms, and software, are NOT dedicated for use by a single tenant or organization. Resources are distributed on an as-needed basis offered through a variety of subscription and pay-as-you-go models.

Public clouds have significant benefits.

- Vast **on-demand resources** are available, allowing applications to respond seamlessly to fluctuations in demand.
- Considering the large number of users that share the centralized cloud resources on-demand, the public cloud offers **the most significant economies of scale**.
- The sheer number of server and network resources available on the public cloud means that a public cloud is **highly available**. If one physical component fails, the service still runs unaffected on the remaining available components.

It's also important to note some concerns users have regarding public clouds.

- **Security.** Security issues such as data breaches, data loss, account hijacking, insufficient due diligence, and system and application vulnerability seem to be some of the fears users continue to have concerning security in the public cloud.

- **Data sovereignty compliance.** With data being stored in different locations and accessed across national borders, it has also become increasingly critical for companies to be compliant with data sovereignty regulations governing the storage, transfer, and security of data.

A service provider's ability to not just keep up with the regulations, but also the interpretation of these regulations, is a concern shared by many businesses

Organizations are increasingly opting to access cloud-based applications and platforms so their teams can focus on building and testing applications, and reducing time-to-market for their products and services. Businesses with fluctuating capacity and resourcing needs are opting for the public cloud. Organizations are using public cloud computing resources to build secondary infrastructures for disaster recovery, data protection, and business continuity. More and more organizations are using cloud storage and data management services for greater accessibility, easy distribution, and backing up their data. IT departments are outsourcing the management of less critical and standardized business platforms and applications to pubic cloud providers.

### Private Cloud
The National Institute of Standards and Technology defines private cloud as cloud infrastructure provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization comprising multiple consumers, such as the business units within the organization. It may be owned, managed, and operated by the organization, a third party or some combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.

Private cloud platforms can be implemented internally or externally. When the platform is provisioned over an organization's internal infrastructure, it runs on-premises and is owned, managed, and operated by the organization. When it is provisioned over a cloud providers infrastructure, it is owned, managed, and operated by the service provider. This external private cloud offering that resides on a cloud service providers infrastructure is called a **Virtual Private cloud (VPC)**. A VPC is a public cloud offering that lets an organization establish its own private and secure cloud-like computing environment in a logically isolated part of a shared public cloud. Using a VPC, organizations can leverage the dynamic scalability, high availability, and lower cost of ownership of a public cloud, while having the infrastructure and security tailored to the organization's unique needs. Virtual Private cloud are offered by most public cloud providers, such as IBM and Amazon.

A private cloud is a virtualized environment modeled to bring in the benefits of a public cloud platform without the perceived disadvantages of an open-end shared public platform. Users of a private cloud, such as developers and business units in an organization still get to leverage benefits such as economies of scale, granular scale, operational efficiencies, and users self-service while exercising full control over access, security and compliances specific to their organization and business.

Private cloud provide you with

- The ability to leverage the value of cloud computing using systems that are directly managed or under perceived control of the organization's internal IT.
- The ability to better utilize internal computing resources, such as the organization's existing investments in hardware and software, thereby reducing costs.
- Better scalability through virtualization and cloud bursting, that is, leveraging public cloud instances for a period of time, but returning to the private cloud when the surge is meet.
- Controlled access and greater security measures customized to specific organizational needs.
- The ability to expand and provision things in a relatively short amount of time, providing greater agility.

Organizations may choose to opt for private cloud because of various reasons, because their applications provide a unique competitive advantage. There are security and regulatory concerns, or because their data is highly sensitive and subject to strict industry or governmental regulations.

Some common use cases for a private cloud include:

- A private cloud is an opportunity for organizations to modernize and unify their in-house and legacy applications. Moving these applications from their dedicated hardware to the cloud also allows them to leverage the power of the compute resources and multiple services available on the cloud.
- Using the private cloud, organizations are integrating data and application services from their existing applications with public cloud services. This allows them to leverage their private cloud's compute capability for the larger jobs while pulling data into an application on a private cloud to leverage public cloud services. Essentially, opening their data centers to work with cloud services.
- Application portability is a key feature of cloud platforms. Using the private cloud gives organizations the ability to build applications anywhere and move them anywhere without having to compromise security and compliance in the process.
- Some of the key reasons that may prevent an organization for moving to a public cloud include security and regulatory concerns and data sensitivity. A private cloud offers these organizations the benefits of on-demand enterprise resources while exercising full control over critical security and compliance issues from within the environment of their dedicated cloud.

### Hybrid Cloud
Hybrid cloud is a computing environment that connects an organization's on-premise private cloud and third-party public cloud, into a single flexible infrastructure for running the organizations applications and workloads. The mix of public and private cloud resources gives organizations the flexibility to choose the optimal cloud for each application or workload. Workloads move freely between the two clouds as needs change, organizations can choose to run the sensitive, highly regulated, and mission-critical applications or workloads with reasonably constant performance and capacity requirements on private cloud infrastructure, while deploying the less sensitive and more dynamic workloads on the public cloud. With proper integration and orchestration between the public and private clouds, you can leverage both clouds for the same workload. For example, you can leverage public cloud instances for a period of time, but returned to the private cloud when the search is met, also known as cloud bursting.

The key tenants of a hybrid cloud are interoperability, scalability, and portability. Hybrid cloud is interoperable, which means that the public and private cloud services can understand each other's APIs, configuration, data formats, and forms of authentication and authorization. When there's a spike in demand, a workload running on the private cloud can leverage the additional public cloud capacity making it scalable. A hybrid cloud is also portable. Since you're no longer locked in with a specific vendor, you can move applications and data not just between on-premise and cloud systems, but also between cloud service providers. Hybrid is about taking the best of both worlds.

There are two common types of hybrid clouds, hybrid monocloud and hybrid multicloud. Hybrid monocloud is a hybrid cloud with one cloud provider while a hybrid multicloud is an open standards-based stack that can be deployed on any public cloud infrastructure. The difference lies in the flexibility that the hybrid multicloud offers organizations to move workloads and environments from one vendor to another. There's also a variant of hybrid multicloud called the composite multicloud, which makes this flexibility even more granular as it distributes single applications across multiple providers, allowing you to move application components across cloud services and vendors as needed.

Hybrid cloud offers significant benefits in areas of security and compliance, scalability and resilience, resource optimization and cost-saving. A hybrid cloud lets organizations deploy highly regulated or sensitive workloads in a private cloud while running the less sensitive workloads on a public cloud. Using a hybrid cloud, you can scale up quickly, inexpensively, and even automatically using the public cloud infrastructure, all without impacting the other workloads running on your private cloud. Because you're not locked in with a specific vendor and also don't have to make either/or decisions between the different cloud models, you can make the most cost efficient use of your infrastructure budget. You can maintain workloads where they are most efficient, spin up environments using Pay-As-You-Go in the public cloud, and rapidly adopt new tools as you need them. However, hybrid clouds are complex and challenging to deploy and maintain since they involve synchronization, redirection, latency, security, portability, interoperability, and compatibility of policies, applications and data and so on. A typical organization will have a range of applications and workloads spread across private, public, and traditional IT environments. This represents a range of opportunities for optimization via a hybrid cloud approach.

Let's look at some increasingly common Hybrid cloud use cases.

- **Software-as-a-service integration.** Through Hybrid Integration, Organizations are connecting software-as-a-service applications available in the public cloud to their existing public cloud, private cloud and traditional IT applications to deliver new solutions.
- **Data and AI integration.** Organizations today are creating richer and more personal experiences by combining new data sources on the public cloud, such as weather, social, the Internet of Things, CRM, and ERP, with existing data and analytics, machine learning and AI capabilities.
- **Enhancing legacy apps.** An increasing number of organizations are using public cloud services to upgrade the user experience of their on-premises applications and deploy them globally to new devices while incrementally modernizing their core business systems.
- **VMware migration.** More and more organizations are lifting and shifting their on-premises virtualized workloads to a public cloud without conversion or modification to reduce their on-premises datacenter footprint, and position themselves to scale without added capital expense. 
- **Leveraging public cloud services.** Using the private cloud, organizations are integrating data and application services from their existing applications with public cloud services. This allows them to leverage their private cloud compute capability for the larger jobs while pulling data into an application on a private cloud to leverage public cloud services, essentially, opening their datacenters to work with cloud services.

### Community Cloud
#### What is a community cloud?
A community cloud is defined by NIST SP 800-145 as:
“Cloud infrastructure [that] is provisioned for exclusive use by a specific community of consumers from organizations that have shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). It may be owned, managed, and operated by one or more of the organizations in the community, a third party, or some combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.”

#### Why community cloud?
Community cloud approach is used by organizations for the following reasons:

- The community cloud members work under the same set of security controls.
- The approach provides the members the same attributes like citizenship and authorization controls while giving limited physical and/or logical access to resources.
- It also supports data localization and some data sovereignty requirements based on the location of the community cloud's data centers. 
- The approach defines a perimeter security model encompassing the community cloud. 

#### Implementation of software-defined community cloud 
To establish a security perimeter, most legacy community clouds depend on physical separation from other clouds. However, this implementation could not meet the advanced security, manageability, or compliance requirements of the industry.

In the modern architecture, a software-defined community cloud is designed to deliver the required benefits. Google Cloud is a software-defined approach that provides security and compliance assurances without the strict physical infrastructure constraints of legacy approaches. The Google community clouds use a combination of technologies referred to as “assured clouds” that can:

- Define communities around common projects, security and compliance requirements, and policy.
- Separate shared community projects from other projects.
- Modify capabilities of a community's boundary based on policy-controlled and audited configuration changes.

#### Comparison between traditional and software-defined community cloud
The software-defined community cloud provides many benefits to the users in comparison to the traditional community cloud implementation. The following table depicts the comparison between the two implementations based on the characteristics as stated in the definition given by NIST.

| Characteristic | NIST Definition SP 800-145 | Traditional Cloud Community Implementation | Software-Defined Community Cloud |
|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| Infrastructure Exclusivity | The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a specific community of consumers from organizations that have shared concerns | Separate data centers with separate infrastructure | Each project is effectively a private cloud with isolated infrastructure primitives |
| All users subject to common security controls | (implied) | Same security controls apply across exclusive infrastructure shared by the community | Assured Workloads controls are scoped to the community and enforced through terms of service | 
| Personhood and citizenship of support staff | It may be owned, managed, and operated by one or more of the organizations in the community, a third party, or some combination of them | Personnel must be physically located at dedicated facilities | Access management service restricts support to personnel with required attributes (personhood, citizenship, work location, and more) | 
| Data localization | and it may exist on or off premises | Community dedicated storage devices  | Enforced by software | 
| Defined security parameter | (implied) | The community is the enclave | Each project is its own enclave | 

#### Software defined community cloud as a new type of “Government Cloud”
In Google Cloud Platform (GCP), a project is a unique, logical grouping of “infrastructure primitives.” In this context, an infrastructure primitive is any atomic unit of capacity in GCP – a virtual machine (VM), a persistent disk (PD), a storage bucket, and others. Projects are “global resources” that can be assigned infrastructure primitives from any region or zone.

Every project is an individual project separate from other customers' projects. Low-level resources like hypervisors, blocks in our distributed blockstore that underlies Google Cloud Storage (GCS), and other components are isolated with resource abstractions that enforce the isolation both logically and cryptographically. 

A Private Cloud deployment model is defined in NIST SP 800-145 as:

Cloud infrastructure [that] is provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization comprising multiple consumers (such as business units). It may be owned, managed, and operated by the organization, a third party, or some combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.

When a project is created within GCP, the infrastructure primitives that are assigned to that project are scoped to only that project. This scoping of infrastructure primitives effectively creates an “enclave” per Project.

When overlaid with Assured Workloads constraints for data residency, support personnel attributes, and security controls common to that community, these per-project private cloud enclaves become software-defined community clouds.

#### Benefits of a software-defined community cloud
The approach Google Cloud has taken brings multiple benefits such as meeting security and compliance requirements. New hardware, new services, and improvements to existing services are accessed faster than in traditional community clouds. The process by which new cloud technology can be onboarded and made available is also faster. Overall efficiency is improved in this model due to the scale of infrastructure available to the community; this can translate to improved availability and performance. Security enhancements can be scaled and implemented more quickly.

### Summary of Deployment Models
As a summary, deployment models indicate where the infrastructure resides, who owns and manages it, and how cloud resources and services are made available to users. There are four main deployment models available on the cloud—public, private, hybrid, and community.

In the public cloud model, the service provider owns, manages, provisions, and maintains the physical infrastructure such as data centers, servers, networking equipment, and storage, with users accessing virtualized computing, networking and storage resources as services.

In the private cloud model, the provider provisions the cloud infrastructure for exclusive use by a single organization. The private cloud infrastructure can be internal to the organization and run or on-premises. Or it can be on a public cloud, as in the case of Virtual Private Clouds (VPC), and be owned, managed, and operated by the cloud provider.

In the hybrid cloud model, an organization's on-premise private cloud and a third-party, public cloud are connected as a single, flexible infrastructure that leverages the features and benefits of both Public and Private clouds.

In the community cloud model, the provider provisions the cloud infrastructure for use by a community of organizations with shared concerns. One or more of the organizations in the community, a third-party provider, or both are responsible for the ownership, management, and operation of this infrastructure.

## Overview of Cloud Infrastructure
After choosing the cloud service model and the cloud type offered by vendors, customers need to plan the infrastructure architecture. The infrastructure layer is the foundation of the cloud. This layer consists of physical resources that are housed in Regions, Zones and Data Centers.

A Cloud provider's IT environment is typically distributed across many Regions around the world. A cloud Region, is a geographic area or location where a Cloud provider's infrastructure is clustered, and may have names like NA South or US East. The cloud Regions are isolated from each other so that if one Region was impacted by a natural disaster like an Earthquake, the Cloud operations in other Regions would keep running. Each Cloud Region can have multiple Zones (or Availability Zones or AZ for short), which are typically distinct Data Centers with their own power, cooling and networking resources. These Zones can have names like DAL-09 or us-east-1. The isolation of zones improves the cloud's overall fault tolerance, decreases latency, and avoids creating a single shared point of failure. The Availability Zones (and DataCenters within them) are connected to other AZs and regions, private datacenters and the Internet using very high bandwidth network connectivity. A cloud Data center is a huge room or a warehouse containing cloud infrastructure. These data centers contain pods and racks or standardized containers of computing resources such as servers, as well as storage, and networking equipment - virtually everything that a physical IT environment has.

**Computing Resources**: Cloud providers offer several compute options – Virtual Servers, Bare Metal Servers, and “Serverless” computing resources. Most of the servers in a cloud datacenter run hypervisors to create virtual servers or virtual machines (also called VMs for short), that are software-based computers, based on virtualization technologies. Other servers in the racks are bare metal servers that are physical servers that aren't virtualized. Customers can provision VMs and Bare Metals servers as and when they need them and run their workloads on them. Cloud users can also run their workloads on serverless computing resources, which are an abstraction layer on top of virtual machines. We will talk about all three compute options in greater detail in subsequent videos. 

**Storage**: Information and data can consist of files, code, documents, images, videos, backups, snapshots, and databases and can be stored in many different types of storage options on the cloud. Bare Metal Servers and Virtual Servers are provisioned with default storage in local drives.

**Networking**: Networking infrastructure in a cloud datacenter includes traditional networking hardware like routers and switches, but more importantly for users of the cloud, the cloud providers have Software Defined Networking (or SDN) options where certain networking resources are virtualized or made available programmatically, through APIs. This allows for easier network provisioning, configuration, and management in the cloud. When servers in the cloud are provisioned, you need to setup their public and private network interfaces. The public network interfaces, as the name suggests, connect the servers to the public internet, whereas the private ones provide connectivity to your other cloud resources and help keep them secure. As in the physical IT world, network interfaces in the cloud need to have IP addresses and subnets either assigned automatically or configured. In a cloud environment it is even more important to configure which network traffic and users can access your resources, which can be done by setting up Security Groups and Access Control Lists (or ACLs). For further security and isolation of your resources in the cloud, most cloud providers provide Virtual Local Area Networks (VLANs), Virtual Private Clouds (VPCs), and Virtual Private Networks (VPNs). Some of the traditional hardware appliances such as firewalls, load balancers, gateways and traffic analyzers can also be virtualized and made available as services in the cloud. Another networking capability provided by the cloud providers is Content Delivery Networks (CDNs), that distribute content to multiple points throughout the world so users accessing the content can access it more quickly by getting it from a point nearest to them.

## Computing Resources
### Virtualization and Virtual Machines (VMs)
Virtualization is a fairly old technology, but it's still super relevant to building our cloud computing strategy today. Simply put, virtualization is the process of creating a software based, or virtual, version of something, whether that be compute, storage, networking, servers or applications.

What makes virtualization feasible is something called the hypervisor. A hypervisor is simply a piece of software that runs above the physical server or host. It essentially pulls the resources from the physical server and allocates them to your virtual environments. There are two main types of hypervisors, type 1: bare metal and type 2: hosted.

Bare-metal hypervisors are installed directly on top of the physical server. These are the most frequently type of used hypervisors and are most secure, low latency, and most commonly found in the market. Some examples are VMware, ESXi, Microsoft Hyper-V and open-source KVM.

The other type of hypervisor is hosted. What makes these different is that there is a layer of host OS that sits between the physical server and the hypervisor. These are a lot less frequent. They're mostly used for end-user virtualization, and examples includ Oracle VirtualBox or VMware Workstation. They have a higher latency than bare metal hypervisors.

Once you have your hypervisor installed, you can build virtual environments, or virtual machines (VMs). A VM is simply a software based computer, and runs like a physical computer. Each VM has an operating system and applications, and is completely independent of one another, but you can run multiple VMs on a hypervisor that manages the resources and allocates to different virtual environments from the physical server. Because they're independent, you can run different operating systems on different virtual machines. Because they're independent, they're also extremely portable. You can move a virtual machine from one hypervisor to another hypervisor on a completely different machine almost instantaneously, which gives you much flexibility and portability within your environment.

Some key benefits include 

1. **Cost savings.** When you think about this and the fact that you can run multiple virtual environments from one piece of infrastructure, means that you can drastically reduce your physical infrastructure footprint. This is consolidation at its core, and the fact that you don't have to maintain nearly as many servers, run as much electricity, save on maintenance costs, means that you save on your bottom line at the end of the day.
2. **Agility and speed.** Spinning up a virtual machine is relatively easy and quick - a lot simpler than provisioning an entire new environment if developers want to spin up a new environment to run a dev test scenario. 

3. **Lowers downtime.** When a host goes out unexpectedly, you can move virtual machines from one hypervisor to another on a different physical server.

Virtual Machines or VMs are also known as Virtual Servers or Virtual Instances, or simply instances, depending on the cloud provider. The various cloud providers make VMs available in a variety of configurations and deployment options to serve different use cases. When you create a virtual server in the cloud, you specify the Region and Zone or Data Center you want the server to be provisioned in and the Operating System you want on it. You can choose between shared (that is, a multi-tenant) VMs or dedicated (that is, a single-tenant) VMs. You can also choose between hourly or monthly billing and select storage and networking options for the virtual server.

#### Shared or Public Cloud VMs
Shared or public cloud VMs are provider-managed, multi-tenant deployments that can be provisioned on-demand with predefined sizes. Being multi-tenant means that the underlying physical server is virtualized and is shared across other tenants or users. To satisfy different workloads, cloud providers offer predefined sizes and configurations ranging from a single virtual core and a small amount of RAM to multiple virtual cores and much larger amounts of RAM. For example, there can be configurations for Compute Intensive workloads, Memory intensive workloads, or High Performance I/O. Rather than pick from only pre-defined sizes, some providers also offer custom configurations that allow users to define the number of cores and RAM and local storage characteristics.

Public VMs are usually priced by the hour (or in some cases even seconds) and configurations start as low as pennies per hour. Some providers also let you get monthly VMs, which can result in some cost savings if you know you will run the VM for at least a month, but if you decide to de-commision the VM in the middle of the month, you will still be charged for the full month.

#### Transient or Spot VMs
Transient or Spot VMs take advantage of unused capacity in a cloud data center. Cloud providers make this unused capacity available to users at a much lower cost than regular VMs of similar sizes. Although the Transient VMs are available at a huge discount, the cloud provider can choose to de-provision them at any time and reclaim the resources for provisioning regular, higher-priced, VMs. Because you run the risk of losing these VMs when capacity in the data center decreases, these VMs are great for non-production workloads such as testing and developing applications. They are also useful for running stateless workloads, testing scalability, or running big data and high performance computing (HPC) workloads at a low cost.

#### Reserved Virtual Servers
Reserved virtual server instances allow you to reserve capacity and guarantee resources for future deployments. You reserve desired amount of virtual server capacity, provision instances from that capacity when you need them, and choose a term, such as 1 year or 3 years, for your reserved capacity. You're guaranteed this capacity within the data center of your choice for the life of the contract term. By committing to a longer term, you can also lower your costs compared to hourly or monthly instances. This can be useful when you know you require at least a certain level of cloud capacity for a specific duration.

If you exceed your reserved capacity, you can always choose to supplement your unplanned usage and capacity requirements with hourly or monthly VMs. Note however that not all predefined VMs families or configurations may be available as reserved. Dedicated hosts offer single-tenant isolation. This means that only your VMs run on a given host so they can make exclusive use of full capacity and resources of the underlying hardware. When provisioning a dedicated host, you need to specify the data center and POD in which you want your host placed. You then assign instances, or virtual machines, to a specific host. This allows for maximum control over workload placement. Dedicated hosts are typically used for meeting compliance and regulatory requirements or meet specific licensing terms.

### Bare Metal Servers
A bare metal server is a single tenant, dedicated physical server. In other words, it's dedicated to a single customer. The cloud provider actually takes the physical server and plugs it into a rack in a data center for customers. The cloud provider manages the server up to the operating system or OS, which means if anything goes wrong with the hardware or rack connection, they will fix or replace it, and then reboot the server. The customer is responsible for administering and managing everything else on the server.

Bare metal servers are either pre-configured by the cloud provider to meet workload packages or they can be custom-configured as per customer specifications. This includes the processors, RAM, hard drives, specialized components, and the OS. Customers can also install their own OS and can install certain hypervisors that aren't available from the cloud provider, and thus create their own virtual machines and farms. With bare metal servers, you can also add GPUs, which are designed for accelerating scientific computation, data analytics, and rendering professional grade virtualized graphics.

Because bare metal servers are physical machines, they take longer to provision than virtual servers. Preconfigured builds of bare metal can take 20-40 minutes to provision and custom builds can take around three or four hours. But these provisioning times can vary by cloud provider. As bare metal servers are dedicated for use by a single client at any given time, they tend to be more expensive than similarly sized virtual machines. Also note that unlike virtual servers, not all cloud providers provide bare metal servers. 

Since bare metal servers are fully customizable, they can do what a customer wants in the most demanding environments. Bare metal servers are dedicated and intended for long-term high-performance use in highly secure and isolated environments. Clients have full access and control of bare metal servers because there's no hypervisor required. As there is no sharing underlying server hardware with other customers, bare metal servers fulfill the demanding needs of high-performance computing (HPC), and data intense applications that require minimal latency related delays. These servers also excel in big data analytics applications and GPU-intensive solutions.

Some workload examples that bare metal servers satisfy are ERP, CRM, AI, deep learning, and virtualization. If you use any applications that require high degrees of security control or apps that you've typically run in an on-premises environment, then a bare metal server is a good alternative in the cloud. When comparing bare metal servers to virtual servers, some of the most important considerations are found in customer need. Bare metal servers work best for CPU and I/O intensive workloads, excel with highest performance and security, satisfy strict compliance requirements, and offer complete flexibility, control, and transparency, but come with added management and operational overhead. Whereas virtual servers are rapidly provisioned, provide an elastic and scalable environment, and are low cost to use. However, since they share underlying hardware with other virtual servers, they can be limited in throughput and performance.

### Containers


## Storage
Cloud storage is where you save data files in the cloud. Certain storage must be attached to a compute node before the storage can be accessed, whereas other storage types can be directly accessed either through the public Internet or a dedicated private network connection. Cloud providers host, secure, manage, and maintain the cloud storage and associated infrastructure to ensure you have access to your data when you need it. Cloud storage services allow you to scale your capacity as you need so you only pay for what you provision, usually on a "per gigabyte" basis. The cost of storage will vary by type, but in general, the faster the read / write speed of the storage, the higher the per gigabyte cost. Cloud storage is available in four main types – Direct Attached, File Storage, Block Storage and Object Storage.

Direct Attached storage, sometimes referred to as "Local Storage", is storage which is presented directly to a cloud-based server and is effectively either within the host server chassis or within the same rack. This storage is fast and normally only used to store a server's operating system, although it can have other use cases. The main two reasons why direct attached storage is not so great for other uses besides to store the operating system is that it's typically 'Ephemeral' – meaning that it only lasts as long at the compute resource it's attached to – it cannot be shared with other nodes, and while you can use RAID techniques, it's not as resilient to failure as other types of storage.

File storage is typically presented to compute nodes as 'NFS Storage'. NFS stands for Network File System and means that the storage is connected to compute nodes over a standard ethernet network. NFS-mounted storage is common-place but it tends to be slower than either direct-attached storage or block storage because the data travels over an ethernet network. It also tends to be lower cost than either direct attached or block storage. One advantage of File Storage is that it can be mounted or used on multiple servers at once. File-based storage is a simple, straightforward approach to data storage and works well for organizing data in a hierarchical folder structure, that desktop users are familiar with.

Block storage is presented to compute nodes using high-speed fibre connections, which means that read and write speeds are typically much faster and reliable than with file storage, making block storage suitable for use with databases and other applications where disk speed is important. You typically provision block storage in 'volumes', which can then be mounted onto a compute node, which it then effectively sees as another hard drive. Volumes can normally only be mounted onto one compute node at a time.

With both File and Block storage, you may also hear the term 'IOPS'. IOPS stands for 'Input/Output Operations Per Second' and relates to the speed of the storage or to put it another way, how quickly data can be read from or written to the storage.

Persistence is a term that is used when provisioning File or Block storage and relates to what happens to the storage once the compute node it is attached to is terminated. If the storage is set to 'persist' then it will not be deleted along with the compute node, meaning that it and its data are preserved and available to mount onto another compute node, though you will continue to pay for the storage. You can also, in some cases, set the storage so that it is automatically deleted with the compute node that it is mounted onto – in this case, as we know, it becomes Ephemeral Storage. Here, you will also stop paying for the storage but you will lose any data unless it is backed up somewhere.

There are several ways to backup data in the cloud but one way to back up both File and Block storage is to take a Snapshot that is the image of the storage, at a particular instant. Snapshots are usually fast to create (they don't actually write any data, or rather they create metadata), don't require downtime and subsequent snapshots record only changes to the data. They are great for returning storage to the way it was at a particular snapshot, though note, they cannot be used to recover individual files.

The fourth kind of storage is Object storage. This is a different type of storage in so much as it's not attached to a compute node, rather it is accessed via an API. Of all the storage types, Object Storage is by far the cheapest and also the slowest in terms of read and write speeds, but it is infinite in size to the end user. Unlike File and Block storage where you provision a certain storage capacity and it fills up over time, with Object Storage you can keep adding files to it and it never fills up, you just pay for what you use. This makes Object Storage a fantastic repository for all sorts of unstructured data types, large and small, including documents, video, logs, backups, data from IoT, application binaries and virtual machine images. In the following videos, there will be more detailed information on the different types of storage.

### File Storage
Like direct attached storage, file storage must be attached to a compute node before it can be accessed and have data stored on it. However, File Storage can be less expensive, more resilient to failure, and involve lesser disk management and maintenance for you as the user to do as compared to direct attached storage. You can also provision much larger amounts of File Storage and present it as a disk to a server. File storage is mounted from remote storage appliances. That is, the physical disks are contained in a separate, specialised piece of hardware and they are then connected to the compute node via the underlying infrastructure in the data center. These storage appliances are not only extremely resilient to failure, the data is also far more secure in them as these storage appliances provide services such as encryption in transit. These appliances are all managed by the service provider.

File Storage is mounted to compute nodes via an ethernet network – the same kind of network that you might receive email or browse the internet over, although this ethernet network is normally dedicated to the task. This means it can sometimes be referred to as 'Network Attached Storage', 'Network File Storage' or simply 'NFS'. One of the issues with ethernet networks is that their speed can vary – the more loaded an ethernet network is, the more likely it becomes that its speed or bandwidth will be affected. Of course, Cloud Providers build their storage networks to handle very high volumes of traffic but even so, consistent speed cannot be guaranteed. Therefore, File storage tends to be used for workloads where consistently high network speeds are not a requirement.

In terms of workloads, File Storage can typically be mounted onto more than one compute node at a time, where the mounted disk or volume looks just like another drive on the compute node. The ability for File Storage to be mounted to multiple compute nodes at a time make it an ideal solution where some sort of common storage is required – for example, a departmental file share, a 'landing zone' for incoming files that need to be processed by an application, or a repository of files that a web service might access. In these applications, the potential variance in the speed of the connecting network is not really an issue. Of course, where cost is an issue, you can use file storage for other applications such as databases, but the trade-off is speed.

When you provision file storage, one consideration you need to take into account is the IOPS capacity of the storage. IOPS stands for Input/Output Operations Per Second and refers to the speed at which the disks can write and read data (note this is not the speed of the network between the storage and the compute node). The higher the IOPS value, the faster the speed of the underlying disk. A higher IOPS will also normally cost more. Understanding IOPS is important because if the IOPS value is too low for your application, the storage can become a bottleneck and cause your application to run slowly. Alternatively, if the IOPS is too high, you will probably be paying more than what you need to for your storage. For example, a file share may be mounted on 30 different compute nodes and an application writes and requests data to and from that share 60 times per minute. You can average that out to 1 operation per second. With this simple example, you can see that each application has different IOPS requirements.

### Block Storage
Block storage breaks files into chunks (or blocks) of data and Stores each block separately under a unique address. Like direct attached storage and file storage, block storage also must be attached to a compute node before it can be utilized for your workloads. Block storage, like file storage, can be mounted from remote storage appliances, making it extremely resilient to failure, and keeping data far more secure in them, on account of encryption in transit, and encryption at rest services, available on these appliances. Block storage is mounted as a volume to compute nodes using a dedicated network of fibers, through which signals move at the speed of light. These fiber optic networks are more expensive to build than the ethernet ones which deliver File Storage, which is one reason why Block Storage tends to have a higher price-point. However, since the traffic is moving faster and with speed consistency, they are perfect for workloads that need low-latency storage to work effectively. In terms of workloads, it is important to note that unlike File Storage, which can be mounted onto 80 compute nodes or more, Block Storage is normally mounted onto only one compute node at a time. Since these disks run at a consistent high speed, they are perfect for workloads that need consistently fast storage, such as databases and mail servers. Block storage is not suitable for workloads where there needs to be some level of disk sharing between compute nodes. For block storage, as it is for file storage, you need to take the IOPS capacity of the storage into account. Most cloud providers will allow you to specify IOPS characteristics when you provision storage and, in some cases, adjust the IOPS of your storage as you need, so if the requirements or usage behaviour of an application changes, you can adjust accordingly. So, to summarise the commonalities and differences between these two storage types: Block and File Storage is taken from appliances which are maintained by the service provider. Both are normally highly available and resilient and will often include data encryption at rest and in transit.

#### Differences between File and Block Storage

- File storage is attached to a compute node using an ethernet network, so it is sometimes called Network attached or NFS Storage.
- File storage is very reliable, but the speed of the connecting network can vary, based on load. Block storage is attached via a high-speed fiber network, which is very reliable and consistent.
- File storage can be attached to multiple compute nodes at once. Block storage can only be attached to one node at a time.
- File storage is a good choice where file shares are required, where workloads do not require lightning fast connectivity to storage, or where cost is a factor. Block storage is a good choice when supporting an application that needs consistent fast access to disk, such as databases.

Remember to consider the IOPS requirements of the application when provisioning either file or block storage.

### Object Storage
The first thing to note about object storage is that you do not connect it to a particular compute node in order to use it. Instead, you provision an object storage service instance and use an API or application programming interface to upload, download, and manage your data. This means you can directly use object storage with anything that you can call an API and you don't need an underlying compute node. The second thing to note about object storage is that it's less expensive than other Cloud storage options. Its per gigabyte cost is typically a couple of US cents per month, and in some cases even less, depending on the storage tier used. The third and possibly most important thing to note about object storage is that it's effectively infinite. With file and block storage, you specify the size of the storage you want in gigabytes or terabytes, and then pay a fee based on the size you provisioned. With object storage you just consume the storage you need and pay per gigabyte cost for what you use. You can keep uploading files and the storage will never run out.

When would you use object storage? Well, object storage is great for storing large amounts of unstructured data. By unstructured, this means that the data is not stored in any kind of hierarchical folder or directory structure. Object storage uses buckets, and objects are stored within these buckets in a structurally flat way. A bucket is a bit like a folder, in the sense that you can give them meaningful names and, of course, have different buckets for different object types. But you cannot place a bucket with in a bucket. When an object is placed in a bucket, it also has some metadata. Data about the data added to it, such as an object ID. This metadata helps applications to both locate and access the object, as well as provide information on the time that the data was stored or last accessed. When you create a bucket, you don't need to provide or define any sizing information. The bucket will just hold the data that you place inside it. And the service provider ensures that there is sufficient storage capacity available. Buckets can hold as little as a few bytes of data, right up to multiple petabytes and you can build up the amount of data stored as slowly or quickly as you'd like, as well as shrink it back down again. The service provider also takes care of resilience and making sure that the object storage solution is highly available. Some Cloud providers offer different types of buckets within different levels of resilience. For example, they offer buckets which are resilient, but the data is only stored in one data center. This is a good option where data needs to reside in a particular geographical location or in situations where high availability is less of an issue. They will then offer buckets which are highly available across regions where the data is stored multiple times in different data centers or zones in the same region, or even in multiple regions. These options usually cost more, but they provide both the highest level of resilience as well as availability for your data. Object storage has a very flat storage structure. This data can be anything from text files to audio files and video files from IoT data to virtual machine images from backup files to data archives. Pretty much any data which is static and where fast read and write speeds are not necessary, would make a good fit for objects storage. Object storage would, however, not be suitable for running operating systems, nor applications such as databases or anything else where the contents of the files changes.

To summarize, object storage is used to store files or objects which are static. The data that you can store using object storage can be anything from text files to audio and video files, from IoT data to virtual machine images, from backup files to data archives. You cannot run operating systems or other applications such as databases using objects storage. Objects are stored in buckets. You can have multiple buckets but you cannot place buckets within buckets. You do not need to specify a size for a bucket. You can just use as little or as much space as you need. Many providers offer different types of buckets with different charges for each. Some are based on resilience and availability, while others are based on the frequency at which the objects inside are accessed.

#### Object Tiers and APIs
Object Storage buckets also have storage tiers, or classes, associated with them and these tiers are based on how frequently the data is accessed.

- A standard tier bucket is where you would store objects that are frequently accessed. This tier tends to have the highest per gigabyte cost associated with it.
- A vault or archive tier is where you might store documents that are only accessed perhaps only once or twice a month, or less, and this will be offered at a lower storage cost.
- Whereas there may also be cold vault tier, where you would store data that is typically accessed only once or twice a year. This storage often costs just a fraction of a US cent per gigabyte per month.

Often, you can also set up automatic archiving rules for your data, meaning that if an object isn't accessed for a period of time, it will automatically be moved to a cheaper storage tier. The rule uses some of the object's metadata to determine when it should be archived. Note that, Object Storage does not come with IOPS options. Object Storage tends to be very slow in comparison with file or block storage, where downloads typically takes seconds if not longer to complete. Where providers offer cold vault buckets, data retrieval from these tiers can sometimes even take hours because the storage is kept offline. If your application needs fast access to files, then object storage may not be a good option.

We've mentioned that object storage is priced per gigabyte used, but there can also be other costs related to retrieval of the data. These costs are similarly low, but access charges can be higher for data that is in a vault or cold vault tiers, so it is important to ensure that the data is in the correct tier based on its frequency of access. Object Storage does not need to be attached to a compute node for you to access it, rather you access object storage through an application program interface, or API. The most common API for object storage is called the S3 API, which is a standard based on the S3 object storage offered by AWS. Many providers offer APIs to their object storage, which is S3 compatible, which is useful, because it means developers can write code which is able to access multiple vendors object storage. The API itself is an HTTP based RESTful API, or RESTful web service. The API call allows applications to manage object storage and buckets, as well as put, upload, or get download objects to and from them.

Object Storage is not just for new applications, but can be used to meet requirements for existing ones. It can also be used as an effective solution for backup and disaster recovery as a replacement for off-site tape based solutions, reducing the time to restore data. Many backup packages now include the ability to backup data up into the Cloud using object storage. Object Storage is more efficient than tape backup solutions, which require tapes that need to be physically loaded into, and removed from, tape drives and moved off-site for geographical redundancy.

To summarize, object storage has different tiers with different charges for each. Some are based on the frequency at which the objects inside are accessed. Object Storage is priced per gigabyte of storage used per month plus some charges for data retrieval. Object Storage is much cheaper than file or block storage. Object Storage is very slow in comparison with file and block storage. You can often create rules which allow the automatic archiving of objects to cheaper tiers when they are in frequently accessed. Object Storage is accessed using an API. Many Object Storage providers have an S3 compatible API which means developers can create code that will work against multiple vendor Object Storage solutions. Object Storage in the Cloud offers an effective Backup and Disaster Recovery Solution.

## Other Cloud Related Topics
### Hybrid Multicloud

### Microservices
Microservices architecture is an approach in which a single application is composed of many loosely coupled and independently deployable smaller components or services. These services typically have their own stack running on their own containers. They communicate with one another over a combination of APIs, event streaming, and message brokers. For a business, what this means is that application components can be developed and updated more efficiently by multiple developers working independently. Teams can use different stacks and runtime environments for different components. Components facing too much load can be scaled independently, reducing the waste and cost associated with having to scale entire applications.

The way developers work to build applications is changing. In the past, software was built as large monolithic applications where a team of developers would take months to construct a large application built on a common code base. These developers would write every part of the application from start to finish. Now, after decades of software development, there are vast amounts of code already out there that developers can use as the base of an application, meaning they no longer have to create every line of code from scratch. Cloud development platforms provide developers with an ecosystem of code that can be easily and securely integrated into applications. Now, instead of building one huge application on one team, developers break into small independent teams where they write smaller amounts of code called microservices.

Microservices break down large applications into their core functions. For example, Search, Recommendations, Customer Ratings, or Product Catalogs. Each is developed independently of one another, yet work together on the Cloud development platform to create a functioning application. A container is the distribution method for each microservice, meaning it delivers the code where it needs to go. Containers are plug-and-play, so if one microservice isn't working for an application, developers can take it out and put in a different one without disrupting how the rest of the app functions.

### Serverless
Serverless is an approach to computing that offloads responsibility for common infrastructure management tasks such as scaling, scheduling, patching, and provisioning application stacks to cloud providers allowing developers to focus their time and effort on the code and business logic specific to their applications or process. Serverless doesn't mean there are no servers, only that the management of the underlying physical or virtual servers is removed from their users. The serverless computing environment allocates resources as needed for the applications.

Let's look at some key attributes that distinguish serverless computing from other compute models. The serverless model requires no provisioning of servers, installation of application stacks and software or operation of the infrastructure by the developer. Serverless computing runs code only on-demand on a per request basis, scaling transparently with the number of requests being served. Serverless enables end users to pay only for resources being used, never paying for idle capacity, which is unlike virtual servers on the cloud, where end users pay for VMs as long as they are running, even if idle. Effectively serverless abstracts the infrastructure away from developers, code is executed as individual functions, where each function runs inside a stateless container. No prior execution context is required to serve a request, and with each new request, a new instance of the function is invoked.

Let's look at a scenario, you could, for example, have a serverless platform between the front end of your website and your storage layer running individual functions, the serverless app could be translating text files and storing it in a cloud-based storage service. Using the front end of your website, you send text files to a serverless app. The app creates translations in different languages and then stores these translated files in a Cloud Storage and sends you their links back to you.

Some of the key serverless computing services today include IBM Cloud functions, which is based on Apache OpenWhisk, AWS Lambda and Microsoft Azure functions.

It is important to note that serverless may not be the best fit for all applications or scenarios. You need to evaluate application characteristics and ensure that the application is aligned to serverless architecture patterns. Applications that qualify for a serverless architecture include some of the following characteristics, short-running stateless functions, seconds or minutes, seasonal workloads with varying off peak and peaks, production volumetric data that shows too much idle time, event-based processing or asynchronous request processing for implementing use cases. Microservices that can be built as functions that are stateless. Serverless architectures are well suited for use cases around, data and event processing, IoT, microservices, and mobile back ends. Given its inherent and automatic scaling, rapid provisioning and a pricing model that does not change for idle time, supporting microservices architecture has become one of the most common use cases of serverless computing today. Serverless is well suited to working with structured text, audio, image, and video data around tasks such as data enrichment, transformation, validation, and cleansing, PDF processing, audio normalization, thumbnail generation, and video transcoding. Parallel tasks such as data search and processing and genome processing are also well suited to be run on a serverless runtime. Serverless is also well suited for working with all sorts of data stream ingestions, including business data streams, IoT sensor data, log data, and financial market data.

Finally, let's look at some challenges worth considering about serverless. Serverless workloads are designed to scale up and down in response to workload. But for workloads characterized by long-running processes, managing a traditional server environment might be simpler and more cost effective. The serverless application architecture can be vendor dependent, and so there is a potential for vendor lock-in, particularly involving platform capabilities such as authentication, scaling, monitoring, or configuration management. Because serverless architectures scale up and down in response to workload, they also sometimes need to start up from zero to serve a new request. For certain applications, this delay isn't much of an impact, but for something like a low latency financial application, this delay wouldn't be acceptable.

### Cloud Native Applications
Simply put, a cloud native application is an application developed from the outset to work only in the cloud environment, or an existing app that has been refactored and reconfigured with cloud native principles. A cloud native application consists of microservices working together as a whole to comprise an application, yet each can be independently scaled and iterated through automation and orchestration processes. These microservices are often packaged in containers, which are executable units of software in which the application code is packaged along with its libraries and dependencies so that it can be run from anywhere. The independence enables frequent, iterative improvement of cloud native applications, without disrupting the experience of end-users. Cloud native applications are unlike traditional, or monolithic, applications, that are built out of one huge piece of software and tightly couple the user interface, business-logic layer, and data-layer.

Let’s take the example of how a cloud native application might be used on a travel website. Each topic covered by the site—flights, hotels, cars, specials—is its own microservice. Each microservice may roll out new features independent of the other microservices. Specials and discounts can also scale out independently. While the travel site is presented to customers as a whole, each microservice remains independent and can be scaled or updated as needed without affecting other services. Whether creating a new cloud native application or modernizing an existing application, developers adhere to a consistent set of development principles:

- Follow the microservices architectural approach by breaking applications down to single-function microservices.
- Rely on containers for maximum flexibility, scalability, and portability.
- Adopt Agile methods that speed the creation and improvement process through quick, iterative updates based on user feedback.

### DevOps
Development teams need to design, develop, deliver, and run software as reliably and efficiently as possible. Operations teams need to identify and resolve problems as soon as possible by monitoring, predicting failure, managing the environment, and fixing issues. Combining development and operations with the ability to monitor and analyze and optimize bottlenecks gives us DevOps. A collaborative approach where business owners, and the development, operations, and quality assurance teams collaborate to continuously deliver software. A DevOps approach applies agile and lean thinking principles to all stakeholders in an organization who develop, operate, or benefit from the business's software systems, including customers, suppliers, partners. By extending lean principles across the software supply chain, DevOps capabilities improve productivity through accelerated customer feedback cycles. Unified measurements and collaboration across an enterprise, and reduced overhead, duplication, and rework.

Using the DevOps approach, developers can produce software in short iterations on a continuous delivery schedule of new features and bug fixes in rapid cycles. And businesses can seize market opportunities and reduce time to include customer feedback in their products.

The DevOps process involves

- Continuous delivery, which is about delivering small, well-designed, high quality increments of software to customers.
- Continuous integration, creating packaged builds of the code changes released as immutable images, where immutable implies that when modifications are needed, the entire component is replaced with an upgraded version.
- Continuous deployment, which involves progressing each new packaged build through the deployment lifecycle as rapidly as possible.
- Continuous monitoring with tools that help developers understand the performance and availability of their applications even before they are deployed to production.
- Delivery pipeline, which is an automated sequence of steps that involves the stages of ideation, coding, building, deploying, managing, and continuous improvement, which loops back to the ideation phase in the delivery pipeline.

While DevOps can apply to applications anywhere, there is especially a compelling case for DevOps when it comes to cloud ready and cloud native applications. With its near limitless compute power and available data and application services, cloud computing platforms come with their own risks and challenges. DevOps tools, practices, and processes are helping tackle some of the complexities and challenges posed by the cloud and allowing solutions to be delivered quickly and reliably.

Some core capabilities that DevOps provides to help building and running applications in the cloud a lot more manageable inlcude

- DevOps best practices make it possible to programmatically provision servers, build middleware, install application code, and fully automate the installation process in a way that is documented, repeatable, verifiable, and traceable.
- Application deployments often involve considerable complexity. The DevOps practices of continuous integration and continuous deployment help create a fully automated deployment pipeline, which is important all through the application development lifecycle.
- Cloud native applications form a complex distributed system with multiple moving parts, independent tech stacks, and rapid release cycles.
- DevOps principles are essential to define how people work together to build, deploy, and manage applications in a cloud native approach.
- With the DevOps best practices of automated provisioning and continuous deployment, developers, quality professionals, and other stakeholders can test in low cost production-like test environments that were previously not available, enhancing both productivity and quality.
- When systems are compromised or struggling to recover from natural disasters, DevOps best practices make it possible to rebuild these systems quickly and reliably.

DevOps provides a powerful set of principles, practices, and tools to realize the full potential of cloud native computing as well as for modernizing existing applications to leverage cloud benefits.

### Application Modernization
|| Past | Now | Now and Future |
|---|---|---|---|
| Architecture | Monoliths | Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) | Microservices |
| Infrastructure | Physical Servers| Virtual Machines (VMs) | Cloud |
| Delivery | Waterfall | Agile | DevOps |



